## 7 The C++ Interface

The COSY INFINITY language environment offers an object oriented approach to advanced numerical
data types. The C++ interface to COSY INFINITY (and also the F90 interface discussed in Section 8)
allow the use of these data types in a modern object-oriented language while retaining the power of the
high performance data types and algorithms of COSY INFINITY.

The C++ interface is implemented through the Cosy class, which offers access from within C++ to
the core of COSY INFINITY. This interfacing is achieved by embedding the COSY INFINITY execution
engine into a C++ class. Since the glue that holds the two systems together is a very lightweight wrapper
of C++ code, the performance of the resulting class comes close to the performance of COSY INFINITY
itself and exceeds that of other approaches (the CPU time lies within a factor of two to that of the use in
the COSYScript language environment on most machines).

The COSY INFINITY language (c.f. Section 3) uses an object-oriented approach to programming
which centers around the idea of dynamic typing: all Cosy objects have an internal type (which may be
real, string, logical, etc. { refer to Appendix A for details) and the exact meaning of operations on COSY
objects is determined at runtime and not at compile time.

The Cosy class attempts to be compatible with the C++ double precision data type. In most cases, it
should be possible to convert an existing numerical program to a Cosy-based one by simply replacing the
string \double" with the string \Cosy" in the source. However, using this approach would under-utilize
the Cosy class, which shows its real strengths if the advanced data types like DA vectors, or Taylor models
are used. For example, replacing the double precision numbers in an existing program with Cosy objects
that are initialized to DA vectors would allow high-order sensitivity analysis of the original program.
Other benefits lie in the automatic verification of existing programs by using Taylor models.

### 7.1 Installation

The implementation of the Cosy class is based on the Fortran 77 files which make up the core source
implementation of the COSY INFINITY system. Most of the actual C++ code is automatically generated
from these Fortran 77 files by theF2C converter[11]. For purposes of guaranteed robustness of the
translation, we maintain a source version of F2C that can be downloaded from the COSY download site,
which itself can be compiled with any standard C compiler leads guaranteed Consequently, use of the Cosy
class requires theF2C libraryto be installed on the user's system. One generic source of F2C is located
at https://www.netlib.org/f2c/ , but various dedicated binary distribution of the library for a particular
combination of compiler and system libraries exist and may be preferable. For the user's convenience, the
source code of said library is also available from the COSY INFINITY download site. While this version
may be not as up-to-date as the one available from other sources, it will always be guaranteed to work
with COSY. It is important to note that the F2C converter is not required for the compilation of the Cosy
class.

Several files of the distribution of the Cosy class are automatically generated from the Fortran 77 source
files of COSY INFINITY by the F2C program. This conversion has been done by the COSY INFINITY
development team and the users should never have to change any of the automatically generated files.
Below is a description of the various automatically generated files contained in the distribution of the
Cosy class.

*.cpp:C++ source files automatically generated by F2C from the Fortran 77 source code

*.P:include files automatically generated by F2C from the Fortran 77 file


##### 56 7 THE C++ INTERFACE

*.c:C-structs that are automatically generated from the Fortran 77 files by the F2C converter

The actual implementation of the Cosy class is contained in the files cosy.h and cosy.cpp. These files
contain a small amount of specialized code (to interface with the automatically translated files mentioned
above) and a large portion of these two files is automatically generated by the GENFOX program from
the COSY INFINITY language description contained in the file GENFOX.DAT (c.f. Appendix A). The
file main.cpp, which is part of the distribution, contains a small demo program that illustrates how the
Cosy class can be used in practice. While it does not use all features of the class, it should provide a good
starting point for the development of new programs with the Cosy class.

Finally, a Makefile is provided to compile the Cosy class and the file main.cpp to an executable \cosy".
To start the compilation, just type \make cosy". The provided Makefile is rather generic and should be
used as a starting point for a new build environment. If users port the build system to a new platform
we would like to hear about this, so we can include the necessary files in the distribution. Currently, the
Makefile is tailored to UNIX environments with the GNU make programgmakeand GNU compiler.

### 7.2 Memory Management

The Cosy class manages its own internal memory and does not use dynamic allocation of memory by
either malloc or new. In addition to the specialized numerical algorithms used for COSY's internal data
types, this fact contributes to the performance advantage that COSY INFINITY has over languages like
C and C++.

As a consequence of this, every Cosy object requires a small portion of space in some non-dynamic
memory region. While this is never an issue with global and local variables, this becomes an issue when
Cosy objects are created dynamically by usingnewornew[], especially since high-dimensional multi-
variable Cosy objects can be very large in size. Consequently,dynamic allocation of Cosy objects should
be used cautiously or avoided. If Cosy objects have to be created dynamically, care should be taken to
delete the objects as soon as possible, or the COSY system will exhaust its internal memory.

### 7.3 Public Interface of the Cosy Class

In this section we describe the public interface of the Cosy class. Most of the functions and operators
described in this section fall in the categories of constructor, assignment, and unary operators and have
no equivalent constructs in the standard COSY INFINITY language described in Section 3. Therefore,
reading this section is essential for the understanding of the C++ interface to COSY INFINITY.

#### 7.3.1 Constructors

To allow an easy conversion of existing code from the double data type to the Cosy data type, several
constructors have been defined that should accommodate this through a variety of implicit constructions.
Together with the built-in type conversions of C++, this mechanism should be able to handle almost any
situation correctly. The default constructor

Cosy( );

creates a Cosy object with enough internal space to store one number or character. The object's type is
initialized toREand its value is set to zero.

Cosy( const double val, int len = 1 );


creates a Cosy object with enough internal space to holdlennumbers or characters. The parameterlen
is optional and defaults to 1. The object's type is initialized toREwith valueval.

Cosy( const int val, int len = 1 );

creates a Cosy object with enough internal space to storelennumbers or characters. The parameterlen
is optional and defaults to 1. The type of the object is initialized toRE(COSY INFINITY does not have
a dedicated data type for integers), and its value is set toval.

Cosy( const bool f );

creates a Cosy object with enough internal space to store one number or character. The object's type is
initialized toLOand its value is set to the boolean valuef.

Cosy( const char *str );

creates a Cosy object from a C stringstr. The object's type is set toSTand enough internal memory
locations are allocated to hold the string (without the terminating NULL character, which is not needed
in COSY). The object is initialized with the stringstr.

Cosy( const Cosy& src );

creates a new Cosy object from an existing one. The new object is initialized with a deep copy ofsrc.
The special constructor

Cosy( integer len, const int n, const int dim[] );

creates a Cosy object that represents a Cosy array of dimensionalityn. The length of each of the dimensions
is given in the arraydim. And each entry of the array has internal space forlennumbers and is initialized
to zero with typeRE. For further details on Cosy arrays, refer to Section 7.6.

#### 7.3.2 Assignment Operators 4 CONTENTS

The Cosy class supports all assignment operations available in C++. Moreover, all the assignment oper-
ations that are commonly used with floating point numbers are implemented in a way compatible with
the standard C++ definitions for floating point data types.

Cosy& operator =(const Cosy& rhs)

assigns a deep copy ofrhsto the object and return a reference to it.

Cosy& operator+=(const Cosy& rhs)

addsrhsto the object and return a reference to it; equivalent tox=x+rhs.

Cosy& operator-=(const Cosy& rhs)

subtractsrhsfrom the object and return a reference to it; equivalent tox=x-rhs.

Cosy& operator*=(const Cosy& rhs)

multiplies the object withrhsand return a reference to it; equivalent tox=xrhs.

Cosy& operator/=(const Cosy& rhs)

divides the object byrhsand return a reference to it; equivalent tox=x=rhs.


##### 58 7 THE C++ INTERFACE

Cosy& operator&=(const Cosy& rhs)

unites the object withrhsand return a reference to it. For numerical Cosy objects, the result of a
union is usually a vector. Please refer to Appendix A for further details. It should be noted that this
implementation of this operator is not compatible with the default behavior of this operator in C++.

#### 7.3.3 Unary Mathematical Operators

The Cosy class supports all unary operators available in C++. The operators are compatible with the
default implementations for floating point variables. The operator

Cosy operator+()

returns the positive of the object. This is in fact an identity operation and is included only for completeness.

Cosy operator-()

returns the negative of the object without modifying it.

Cosy operator++()

adds one to the object and return the result.

Cosy operator--()

subtracts one from the object and return the result.

Cosy operator++(int)

adds one to the object and return a copy of the object before the operation.

Cosy operator--(int)

subtracts one from the object and return a copy of the object before the operation.

#### 7.3.4 Array Access

In order to access COSY array elements, the command

Cosy get(const int coeff[], const int n)

obtains a copy of an array element. The element is described by the n-dimensional array coeff. More
details on Cosy arrays are provided in Section 7.6.

void set(const Cosy& arg, const int coeff[],const int n)

copies the Cosy object arg into an array. The target element is described by the n-dimensional array coeff.
More details on Cosy arrays are provided in Section 7.6.

#### 7.3.5 Printing, IO, and Streams

As indicated earlier, the code for the Cosy class is automatically derived from Fortran 77 code by using
the F2C converter [11]. Consequently, the IO handling of the underlying C code is conceptually closer to
the \printf"-type ideas of C than it is to the streams of C++.


However, by using temporary files, the Cosy class has partial support for the stream based IO of C++.
This mechanism uses the file COSY.TMP in the current working directory as a translation buffer. This
allows the Cosy class to be compatible with output streams. The command

friend ostream& operator(((ostream& s, const Cosy& src)

prints a representation of the object src onto the ostream s. The printing uses the formats specified in
Section 3.

#### 7.3.6 Type Conversion

While the implicit type conversion mechanisms of C++ allow a transparent transition from the default
C++ data types to Cosy objects, the conversion of Cosy objects into standard C++ data types on the
other hand requires use of the dedicated conversion functions listed below. The command

friend double toDouble(const Cosy& arg)

returns a double precision variable that represents the result of calling the functionCONS(c.f. Section
3) on the Cosy object arg.

friend bool toBool (const Cosy& arg)

returns a boolean variable that contains the boolean value of the Cosy object arg. If arg is not of type
LO, the return value is undefined.

friend string toString(const Cosy& arg)

returns a C++ string object that contains the string contained in the Cosy object arg. If arg is not of
typeST, the result is undefined.

### 7.4 Elementary Operations and Functions

The COSY INFINITY environment has a large number of operators and functions built into its language.
The C++ interface to COSY INFINITY aims to give transparent access to these functions by trying to
be compatible with both the notations of C++ and of COSY INFINITY. To that end, the operators
are compatible with the C++ notations, and the elementary functions are compatible with the standard
C++ naming conventions (and almost all functions defined in \math.h" for double precision floating point
numbers) are supported for Cosy objects.

As a general rule, all functions in C++ are named with the lower case version of their corresponding
COSY INFINITY identifier. However, whenever COSY INFINITY uses a name for a function that does
not exist in C++ (e.g., the absolute value function is called \abs" in COSY INFINITY, while it should
be called \fabs" in C++), both names are made available. Whenever the name of a COSY FUNCTION
clashes with reserved words of C++, the first letter of that function's name is capitalized (e.g. the COSY
INFINITY functionREALis called \Real" in the C++ interface). Furthermore, all elementary type
generators in COSY (the first set of intrinsic functions having two letter names) are fully capitalized,
which allows for them to be clearly distinguished them from other C++ tools and is inconsequential
because they are only relevant for Cosy objects. A complete list of all functions supported in C++ and
their explicit upper/lowercase names can be found in the file cosy.h that is part of the C++ distribution.

```
For the operators defined in COSY INFINITY, the following deviations from these general rules exist:
```

##### 60 7 THE C++ INTERFACE

```
While the exponentiation is an operation in COSY INFINITY, C++ uses the functionpow(...)
for this.
```
```
The operator#of COSY INFINITY is not defined in C++ and has been replaced with the C++
operator!=.
```
```
The operators &,jand % (the Cosy operators for union, Extraction, and Derivation) do not
follow the standard C++ conventions. However, since the Cosy class is meant to be used for the
development of new programs, or as a replacement for double variables, overloading these operators
is unlikely to cause any problems.
```
All operators and functions listed in Appendix A are available in C++, and have the following signature

inline<type> <namejoperator op>
(const Cosy& lhs, const Cosy& rhs) ;

Please refer to Appendix A for further details on the individual functions and operators.

```
Cosy operator+
Cosy operator-
Cosy operator*
Cosy operator/
Cosy pow
bool operator<
bool operator>
bool operator==
bool operator!=
Cosy operator&
Cosy operatorj
Cosy operator%
bool operator<=
bool operator>=
```
The standard functions defined for the Cosy class are listed in Appendix A. These functions are also
referred to as \intrinsic functions" for Cosy objects. To a large extent, the functions follow the standard
naming conventions of standard C++. The first columns lists the COSY INFINITY name of the function
and the second columns shows the complete C++ declaration of the function. For further details about
their meaning, the corresponding COSY INFINITY functions should be looked up in Appendix A.

```
The signature of the Cosy function<NAME>is as follows:
```
Cosy<name>(const Cosy& x);

where<name>is the name of the function from Appendix A. Note that for C++ use, all names have to
replaced by lowercase.

### 7.5 COSY Procedures

The COSY INFINITY language environment has various intrinsic procedures built into its language.
These procedures range from diagnostic tools (e.g.,MEMFRE) over file handling to complex tasks (e.g.,
POLVAL). For a complete interface from C++ to COSY INFINITY it was necessary to make these
procedures available as \void functions". The C++ interfaces to the procedures all have a standardized
signature


void<name>(...);

All procedures take at least one argument, and all arguments are either of type \Cosy &" or \const
Cosy &". The complete list of the COSY procedures available in this way can be found in Appendix A.
Note that a \c" parameter stands for \const Cosy &" arguments; a \v" parameter denotes \Cosy &"
arguments. The name of the procedure has to be supplied in lowercase.

### 7.6 Cosy Arrays vs. Arrays of Cosy Objects

In the COSY INFINITY language environment, arrays are collections of objects that may or may not have
the same internal type. Thus, within COSY INFINITY, it is conceivable to have an array with entries
representing strings and real numbers. In that sense, the notion of arrays in COSY INFINITY is quite
similar to the notion of arrays of Cosy objects in C++.

However, there is a fundamental difference between the two concepts: a C++ array of Cosy objects is
not a Cosy object. Due to this difference, the C++ interface does not use C++ arrays of Cosy objects
(although the user obviously has the freedom to declare and use them). As a consequence, the interface
provides two different (and slightly incompatible) notions of arrays. \Arrays of Cosy Objects" are C++
arrays and they can be used wherever C++ permits the use of arrays. \Cosy Arrays", on the other hand,
are individual Cosy objects which themselves contain Cosy objects. Since several important procedures
of COSY INFINITY assume their arguments to be Cosy arrays, Cosy arrays are quite important in the
context of COSY INFINITY and its C++ interface.

Since the C++ interface to Cosy does not use the \[ ]" operator for the access to elements, users
should use the utility functions

Cosy get(const int coeff[], const int n)

and

void set(const Cosy& arg, const int coeff[], const int n)

described in Section 7.3.4 to access the elements of a Cosy array. To simplify the access to individual
array elements, we suggest that users use inheritance or external utility functions like

```
Cosy get(Cosy &a, int i, int j) f
int c[2] = fi+1, j+1g;
return a.get(c, 2);
g
```
for convenient access to the elements of Cosy arrays. Since Cosy arrays start at one, (as opposed to C++
arrays that start at 0), these utility functions could also be used to mask this implementational detail
from the user. However, since the user's requirements on the dimensionality of Cosy arrays vary widely,
the distribution of the C++ interface does not provide any of these convenience functions.

Finally, we point out that the two different concepts of arrays lead to the possibility of having C++
arrays of Cosy arrays { although it would be quite challenging to maintain a clear distinction between the
various indices needed to access the individual elements.


##### 62 8 THE FORTRAN 90 INTERFACE
